This is an interview with Major General Thomas
Darling by Tara Pressnell on April 25, 1991 at
General Darling's office concerning Vietnam. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge, I am
asking you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas
A&M Oral History Collection in the University
Archives. Is that alright with you? Yes, that's
fine.
For the purpose of this interview, could you
please give me your date and place of birth and
formal educational background? I was born April
30, 1932, in Abilene, Texas. I came to Texas A&M in
the fall of 1950, graduated here in 1954, and went
immediately into the Air Force. While in the Air
Force, I earned a Master of Science in Public
Relations. public administration from George
Washington University, graduate of the Air Force
Pilot School, the Air Command and Staff College,
the Squadron Officer Force, and the Naval War
College. What unit were you with and where were you
based in Southeast Asia? And what was the mission
of the unit that you were assigned to? Well, I was a
member of a provisional wing. I forget even the
number of that provisional wing. located on the
island of Guam. Early in the war, when it was
determined that they needed the B-52s for bombing
in Vietnam, they started sending units on
temporary duty to Guam. We were all put in a wing
called, like it was a 41-33rd Provisional Wing.
But it ended up with units from across the United
States supplying elements to that provisional
wing. That's a common organization that was used
in the Persian Gulf conflict. Many of the Air Force
units were assigned to a provisional wing,
meaning a temporary wing for the duration of the
war. But I was a member of this provisional wing on
the island of Guam. elements from several other
bases, stateside bases there when I was there. Say
again the last part of it. What was the mission at
the unit that you were assigned to? The mission I
was assigned to was to conduct iron bombing. I
wouldn't call it strategic bombing. I guess it
would be tactical bombing in support of ground
troops, in South Vietnam primarily. What exactly
were your responsibilities at Anderson Air Force
Base in Guam? I was a B-52 aircraft commander. I had
five other members of that crew and we were an
integral unit. We trained and worked together and
we flew over together and we flew missions
together as an integrated crew. I was the aircraft
commander, the one that was charged with the
training, flying missions, the effectiveness of
that crew, putting the bombs on the target, if you
will. Did you volunteer for duty in Vietnam? Well,
I went willingly. You know, I was not given a chance
to hold up my hand or sign something to say I wanted
to go. I was gone. I was over there before that even
really came in, really. Later in the war, people
had many opportunities to volunteer, and a lot of
people did, but I was over there in early 1966
before, well, in the early stages of the program,
so while I went willingly, I guess you'd say
voluntarily, it really was not... something that
I had an opportunity to say whether I wanted to go or
not. How often were you flying combat missions in
Southeast Asia? We would fly at least every third
day. I was there for about 180 days during that time
that I was assigned to the 4133rd Provisional
Wing. We would sometimes pull spare. They had to
spare each. They provided at least two or three
spare aircraft and crews for each day's mission.
If one of the airplanes that was scheduled to go
couldn't make it for some reason, had a mechanical
problem, couldn't take off, or had to abort and
return, then a spare aircraft would be sent to take
its place, a spare aircraft and crew. So we pulled
spare or actually flew a mission usually about
every other day. Did any of your missions
originate from bases other than Guam? I don't
believe so. We had to divert sometimes for
weather, but I don't believe I actually flew a
mission from any base other than on the island of
Guam. Now, later on in the war, other bases were
brought in. Thailand became a very popular base.
In fact, most of the sorties were launched from
bases in Thailand rather than Guam. Guam was such a
distance away, it made it a very grueling mission.
It was a 12-hour mission at least and an 18- to
20-hour day, the time you consider pre-flight
mission planning. Briefings, takeoff, return,
debriefing, and all of that. So crews could only
fly, and airplanes could only fly so many sorties
in a given period of time. So it was advantageous to
move the bases closer in, move the bases closer in
so that more sorties could be flown. But that was a
problem at Guam, just being such a great distance
from the target area. Would you describe in depth
the typical combat mission in a B-52 from
beginning to end? Okay, I did a little of that, but
let me start over. Most of the missions that I flew,
the takeoff was from 3 to 5 o'clock in the
morning. That was all designed to put us over the
target area at the desired time. But we would take
off, well, we'd start with... With a meal in the
dining hall there, it would usually be three to
four hours in advance of our takeoff time. We'd eat
a meal, and then we would go to our briefings. Those
would last 30 to 40 minutes. We'd have the
operations briefing, the weather briefing. a lot
of other briefings. We'd have the individual cell
briefings where each group of crews that were
flying in a cell together would have their own
briefings. We'd always close with the chaplain,
his comments and a prayer. And then we would go to
our airplanes, pre-flight those airplanes, and
at a given time we would start engines and taxi out
of position and take off. And then, as I say, the
takeoff was all 3 to 5 o'clock in the morning. A lot
of 4 o'clock takeoffs, I remember. But we would
take off, and it was about six hours en route to
Vietnam, to the target area. And en route to about
three hours out, we'd conduct one aerial
refueling, because we needed that fuel to get to
the target area and back. We'd usually meet a
tanker out of the Kadena Air Base, which is located
on the island of Okinawa. The tankers would come up
and we'd rendezvous with them and usually take on
100 to 120,000 pounds of fuel. That would enable us
to fly the mission through the tactics that were
required at the return home. Again, about a
12-hour, 12-and-a-half-hour mission. But we
were loaded with bombs, which limited the amount
of fuel that you could have on board. An airplane
can only take off a certain weight. We usually took
off in the particular airplane that I flew at about
450,000 pounds. And 60,000
pounds or so of that would be bombs. So we couldn't
take off with all the fuel that the airplane would
hold because with the bombs we would exceed the max
weight
that we could actually get airborne. And on the
island of Guam, which is very hot and humid, not a
very good environment there
for maximum performance from an airplane, a jet
engine. It's better performance in cool, dry
conditions. So we needed all the runway there to
get off at the loads that we took off. But anyway,
back to where I started, we would get that
refueling and then we would press on usually over,
we would take off from Guam and head toward,
generally in the direction of Okinawa, refuel and
then from there head toward South Vietnam. And
usually we'd come in from over the South China Sea
And targets were from southern Vietnam, even
bombed in Laos a couple of times.
And that would take us about six hours into the
mission.
The bomb run was, of course, the most critical part
of the mission. to be lined up on the proper axis
that they had planned for you to fly in on. We had to
have exact spacing and distance from the
airplanes in front to the side of us. But each crew
had to make an individual drop. That was the
scheduled way to drop. There were emergency ways
where we could drop from the airplane in front of us
in case we were having system malfunctions. But
generally, we dropped individually. But these
missions were all designed to achieve a certain
pattern with bombs. We were scheduled to drop
inside of a box. And we knew what that box was. Of
course, we tried hard to always make sure we were in
that box. One thing, we did not drop unless we had
positive contact with the target that we were
dropping on. just to make random drops. You had to
be certain of what you were bombing or you didn't
drop bombs. That's very important. But the run
into the target from the coast would be a 30, 40
minute period, roughly from the time we coasted
in, penetrated the area, and dropped our bombs,
did our maneuvers, and returned to the coast. But
that was the critical period when everything
became quite intense. Then on the return flight,
we'd fly straight back to the island of Guam,
flying over the Philippines. We'd usually fly at
43,000, 44,000 feet to conserve fuel by airplane,
getting better fuel performance at higher
altitudes. So we had to do that to get home. A lot of
weather, usually both going and coming to skirt.
But we, again, tried to maintain the formation,
the cell as we called it. We took off in cell, we
bombed in cell, we returned in cell, we landed in
cell formation. Again, a mission that usually was
12 to 12 and a half hours long, and after that we
would taxi and unload our equipment and go into a
debriefing that was very extensive. It took
considerable time. They asked us questions. We
had to fill out forms pertaining to the mission.
and what we encountered from radars to what we saw
in the target area, any other things that we
observed, the general intelligence
fact-finding kind of debriefing that we went
through. Also, we had to be debriefed about the
equipment on the airplane, the systems, what
malfunctioned, any problems that we had. A lot of
paperwork to fill out, and that usually took an
hour and a half or so to do all of that.
And then
we were free to go on in our barracks area if they
don't want. That's a typical mission. At the time
that you were flying combat missions, how much
leeway and choosing targets were commanders
given? Very little.
There were I can't recall a time that I had any
leeway on the target that we were to bomb with maybe
this exception. If there was weather in the area
that would preclude us from hitting the target, we
might have been given secondary targets that we
could go and strike. But it was a matter of me
determining the weather was too severe for us to go
to the original target, and we might have to go to an
alternate target, which we'd already been given.
But we were not given the latitude to select the
targets on our own. That's not our option, at least
not during the time that I was there. In relation to
that question, could you give specific examples
of targets that Johnson or Nixon disapproved, and
why? That they disapproved? You know, at my level,
I really didn't know that. I know that mission
tasking sometimes at least appeared to come from
back home somewhere. And I know that the targets we
struck were very, very tightly controlled, and a
lot of it was developed for reasons that we didn't
even understand or weren't even aware of what all
went into the selection of the targets. As a young
crew member, my job was to take a mission that I'd
been assigned and go do that, and I really didn't
understand or know how a lot of that came about. But
it was my feeling that a lot of that was determined
at very high levels. Did you receive training in
Vietnamese culture before going to Vietnam? Oh, a
little bit. Not very much. Again, our going was
kind of a hasty move. The whole unity of the wing
that I was assigned to back in the States was told on
fairly short notice that we would be deploying.
Again, I was in the fairly early stages of the war.
So we really didn't have time to get a whole lot of
indoctrination. Of course, the other thing, I was
flying missions from Guam, and I had very little
contact with the enemy. It was interesting, the
missions that I flew were high altitude missions.
You couldn't really see things that well on the
ground. And we were bombing an enemy that
essentially I couldn't see. It was kind of an
impersonal war, in that sense, what I was doing.
What were your perceptions of the Vietnamese
people as a whole and the leaders of the Army of the
Republic of Vietnam? Well, my impressions of the
Vietnamese, again, I didn't have that much
contact with them. I did see them
back in the States in places over the period of the
war. You know, I generally had...
in high regard for the Vietnamese that I
encountered during those four years. Again, I
didn't encounter them day to day during the war
because of where I was assigned. The leaders of
Vietnam, I don't know, it's hard to say. Again, I
wasn't, I was not that directly involved. In your
opinion, what was the overall morale of the unit
that you were with? And was there a difference in
morale between the officers and the enlisted? I'd
say the morale of the unit I was assigned was very
high. Again, this was early in the war.
We were, I think, about the second B-52 wing
involved in the war, the second deployment of B-52
wings. Again, our morale was very high. I think the
professionalism was very good. The performance
was outstanding.
And I could cite many examples of what I could say
was an outstanding
performance by crews that I flew with. As far as the
officers listed any difference, I would say the
morale was very high among both. Again, we were in a
little different situation. We could fly combat
missions and come home and sleep in
air-conditioned quarters. Food was good. The
thing that sort of got us down, I guess, toward the
end was the continuation of long, grueling
missions every second or third day that really,
really wear one out. How would you describe your
assignment with the Strategic Air Command and did
the activities of the command escalate with the
warranty? What was the first part? How would you
describe your assignment with the Strategic Air
Command?
Well, that was kind of hard to answer because I
spent 20 something years with the Strategic Air
Command on and off again. I started in that
command, I always felt it was a very professional
organization. I think it was the pace setter for
the Air Force in terms of professionalism and
performance for many years. I think General May
came in and helped set some very high standards. It
was very demanding. Crews had to perform. Again, I
think the rest of the Air Force learned a lot from
SAC in those early years. No question in my mind
about that. I think the rest of the Air Force sort of
caught up with SAC in later years.
But, you know, my regard for SAC was always very
high. I always felt that the standards were very
high and that the people they had and I think they
still are. But again, I think many of the SAC
methods and standards were later adopted by the
rest of the Air Force. Standardization is a good
example. SAC in the early years had
standardization programs that They were almost
foreign to the rest of the Air Force. But today,
most Air Force organizations have
standardization programs that follow along the
lines of what was learned at SAC many years ago. The
last part of the question was? Did the activities
of the command escalate with the war in Vietnam?
Oh, yes, very much. More and more SAC units were
added to the conflict. At the end of the campaign, I
can't even recall how many B-52s were involved,
but it seemed to me like there was an order of 200,
something like that. But the Linebacker II
operation in December 1972,
I think was the thing that finally brought that
conflict to an end. Certainly that was a great
escalation of efforts from what it was in the
earlier years when I
was there. What is your understanding of the
reasons that the United States got involved
in Vietnam? Well, I think in 1964,
65,
People thought, believed in the domino theory
that the communists gobbled up one nation and
another was in line to fall. And I think most of us at
that time felt that we need to draw the line, that we
couldn't afford to give up South Vietnam to the
communists. They seemed aggressive and seemed to
have the intent of trying to capture the world, if
you would. And they were determined they weren't
going to be able to do that. I think we really felt
that the communist world was ready to take another
country into their fold. We didn't want them to do
that. And I think that's one of the key things that
got us into the war. Of course, there was I think
other things like shooting at a ship and that sort
of thing that today seem questionable
may be given as the exact reasons that we got into
that
war. But I think generally we were determined that
the Communists weren't going to take another
country and move forward. I understand that
careerism and ticket punching are sometimes
prevalent in the military, and officers serve in
order to further their own self-interest. Did you
find that to be the case in Vietnam? Well, again, I
didn't find it the case in the unit that I was
assigned to in 1966. However, I would say that
there was some of that that went on, perhaps a whole
lot of it went on during the Vietnamese War. I think
there were a lot of people that went forward, get
their ticket punched, as we say, thinking it was
forever their career, and I think it did help some
people. Having that combat experience, I think,
served a lot of people well in later jobs and
responsibilities.
But I didn't observe that in the part of the war in
the time period that I was there, not in the unit
that I was assigned. I think it became more
prevalent in some services later on. What did you
think of the one-year tour of duties that were
served in Vietnam? Well, in hindsight, I think it
was a big mistake. I think we made the mistake of not
utilizing our reserve forces, not having any kind
of globalization effort. I think the Persian Gulf
War stands in the contrast where we learned the
lesson of not getting into rotations but to
mobilize and call up the forces we need and try to
make sure we've had enough to do the job and get on
with it and get it over with. But I think back in
Vietnam, Presidents then, Johnson, Nixon, They
wanted to have guns and butter both, as we say. They
wanted to fight the war and have everything fine
back home and things going normal here. And that
was, I think, the term of the day. A mistake in the
final analysis. The one-year tour, bad in a number
of ways, in my opinion. One, people have to be
trained. It takes a while to get them over there.
When they get there, they have to be
indoctrinated. They have to fly. When I went
there, we had to fly two missions that were
supervised by experienced crews who'd already
been through what we were going through before we
could be turned loose to be on our own. But there was
a lot of in-country indoctrination training that
had to go on. It was some waste of time in the total
scheme of things. Then midway, people are looking
for the end so they can go home or do something else.
But it caused a lack of continuity in planning and
leadership and a lot of things. I just think it's a
big mistake. We'd be much better off to have
mobilized. In your opinion, why was the United
States not successful in the war in Vietnam? Well,
I think I'd say we were successful in the war,
but maybe barely so.
We had a lot of battles that we lost a lot of people
in. I think we failed to understand the culture. I
think at least in the early years we thought that we
did drop a lot of firepower on them and they would
knuckle under and come to see things as we did and it
would respond accordingly. But I think we found
out there are a lot tougher people fighting in the
jungles. It was a lot more difficult than fighting
in the sands and rock.
But the people And it shouldn't have been any less
to us. I think it had been proven before even World
War II. Sometimes the more you bomb people, the
more hurt you cause on them, the more determined
they become. They had thousands of reserves. They
were very good at hiding
and doing harassing kind of things to us. We could
destroy trails and roads. Two days later, they'd
have them restored, and that seemed to be a
surprise to us. We never could quite figure out how
they could do all this. But they were very good at
that. We were fighting on their territory,
something that, in their homeland, that they
understood a lot better than we did, the jungles
and the rivers and all of that. But we never seemed
to get that figured out until the end, I guess.
While
we thought we could, again, exert enough power and
force that would cause them to withdraw or
surrender and back up and come to the peace table,
it never happened until the end of the war. I think
one reason, and I know there are several other
reasons we weren't as successful as we could have
been, We never really turned loose of everything.
We always seemed to fight with one hand behind our
backs.
I think we're a little afraid that millions of the
Chinese would come into the war. I think today
sometimes people have lost sight of the situation
back then. We were concerned about what the
Russians
and the Chinese would do if we went in with an
all-out effort against the North Vietnamese.
What would the Chinese do? Would they turn loose
millions of Chinese troops to come down?
Would we be involved in something that we had no
intentions of getting into or getting involved
with? How would we fight a major land war with
millions of Chinese? We were a little bit afraid of
that. How much effort would the Soviet Union
provide? We didn't know. So we did fight a little
bit restrained, not knowing what we might run up
against, not wanting to alienate the Soviets too
much. I think that hurt us in the long run. I think in
hindsight we would have gone in there with a lot
more force a lot sooner and probably ended that war
on favorable terms for us. But I think we have to
realize that conditions were a little different
in those times. Contrast that again with Iraq. We
didn't have to worry about the Chinese or the
Soviet Union. The Soviet Union was essentially on
our side and supporting the thing. So we could go in
with a free hand and dump half a million troops into
the Persian Gulf in a few months without fear about
what the Soviet Union was going to do. That was not
the case in Vietnam. We had to worry about some
other things. And we didn't want to get into too big
a war over there. So I think that caused us to be a
little restrained. But again, in hindsight, had
we marshalled the forces that we needed, early on
and gone in without holding back, I think
we could have ended that thing a lot sooner. What
lessons did the U.S. Air Force learn from the
Vietnam experience? Well, some we've already
touched on.
I'd say not only the Air Force, but all the military
learned some lessons over there. I think joining
this is one thing that we weren't very good at back
in those days. services tended to do things by
themselves. We didn't have the command structure
set up as well as it could have been. I think, again,
what we saw in the Persian Gulf is a good example of
how jointness can work if you put certain
commanders in charge. You know, Schwarzkopf was
in charge of the whole operation that got minimum
guidance from Washington. He had a pretty free
hand in selecting targets and letting commanders
do their thing. That was a lesson we learned in
Vietnam. All the good things I saw in the Persian
Gulf were pretty much lessons we'd learned in
Vietnam and carried them through well. We didn't
get in a war of attrition in the Persian Gulf. I was
in the state we made in Vietnam. We just sort of
counted the dead people every day to determine how
well you're doing. And those numbers were totally
erroneous, exaggerated. Sometimes it just
didn't know and you can't know. That was a mistake,
but something we learned to not get into a war of
attrition, counting dead bodies.
But putting air power under one commander, I
think, was something we learned in Vietnam and
something that was executed very well in the
Persian Gulf. And one Air Force three-star
general was in charge of all of the air forces, all
elements of our power in the Persian Gulf. And I
think that has set a precedent that we'll stick to
for some time to come. But we had too many – we were
just too fractured, I think, in Vietnam from a lot
of standpoints. Other lessons, mobilization
is one that I mentioned. To call up the forces you
need and put them there for the period that you need
them rather than getting into this rotation box.
That hurt us terribly
in Vietnam. Particularly in the services like the
Army and the Marine Corps that didn't require a lot
of foot soldiers on the ground, a lot of privates,
if you would. And they were drafting these people
and giving them a minimum amount of training,
sending them over there. They didn't want to be
there after a while.
And, you know, all the horror stories of Vietnam
evolved from that kind of thing. The fraggies and
the drug, you know, culture almost started during
that period. Just a lot of bad things, I think, from
a rotation
policy that called for a lot of grantees to be sent
over there. We weren't really committed to the
effort. I think we learned that we need more
stability in units rather than just a flow of
people going in and out of a unit. It's been studied
and proven for years that people will die for a unit
that they feel very attached to when they wouldn't
for any other reason. They'll die for a friend or a
buddy that's very close to them. But when you're
rotating people in and out of a unit, there's no
real attachment to each other. I think that was a
good lesson
from Vietnam. Working in unified ways Again, it
relates to the jointness theory. I think it was a
good lesson. We certainly improved there how to
work together. Another thing we learned was that
responsibility, well, those who execute the war
have to be put down as low a level as you can do that.
The field commanders have to be given some
authority
to do certain things. Everything cannot be
controlled from back home. I know that you had many
unforgettable experiences while in Vietnam, but
is there any one in particular that you would like
to relate to me?
Well, I guess one of the,
again, this happened in the spring of 1966, which
was pretty early in the war. But flying B-52s there
was still a pretty new thing. I remember we got a
mission that we were told one day that the next day
that we were going to North Vietnam to bomb, which
presented a much more serious threat to us as a big
airplane, something we were quite apprehensive
about, as it turned out, and we actually were over
in Laos. But it again was a much more hostile
environment than what we had been flying earlier
missions into. We were concerned about that, but
they had this
big the trail that the Vietnamese were using to
transport equipment, supplies, and people down.
But there was a big cliff area there, as I
understood it, that was going to us. Down at the
bottom was a valley that, again, a lot of the
equipment was flowing down to south Vietnam. But
they wanted to send the B-52s in there to sort of
level that cliff, fill in the valley, and shut off
with the supply of equipment and supplies into
South Vietnam. And we took it as a big challenge,
and it was the biggest mission flown up until that
point of the war. And I remember we were tasked to
fly 30 B-52s and 30 KC-135s, taking off at
one-minute intervals, all launching from Guam
during the night hours. something that we were
very keyed up for. You know, I can liken it to one of
the early missions of the troops. It was like the
first night that they flew into Iraq. It's kind of
unknown territory and you don't know what threats
you're going to run into. We suspected that the
fighters would be after us and some SAMs would be
after us and that proved true to some extent. But
again, We all took that mission very seriously
with a great deal of apprehension of the unknown.
But I remember we took off that night, and the most
amazing thing to me was that we were scheduled to
launch 60 airplanes at one-minute intervals. And
I'm talking big airplanes. I'm not talking F-15s
or something like that, little fighters. But to
put together a 60 ship launch at one minute
intervals is a pretty fantastic thing. But that
night we, in total darkness, launched those 60
airplanes exactly on the hack when they depart.
That may not seem such a tremendous thing to one
that's not that familiar with aviation big
airplanes, nighttime, carrying large loads of
bombs. But I considered it the greatest thing that
I observed. Again, all 60 of those airplanes took
off, performed their mission, and all returned.
We did have some SAMs, and I remember listening
over the radio that night. I remember a couple of
fighter planes were shot down by SAMs, and I heard
and saw some of that. But again, all of the weapons
were delivered and every airplane flew its
mission as prescribed and all returned as
planned. And I think that's a pretty amazing feat
in aviation. Unfortunately, we dropped the bombs
and thought we'd done a pretty good job. But we were
told within just a few days that they would reopen
up the supply lines through that same valley that
we thought we would wipe down. So while it was a
great feat, it was a great disappointment too
because we didn't really do what, although we
cratered the cliff and filled in the valley and all
of that, The
photo by recce planes in the next few days showed
that they had thousands of Vietnamese in there
working and had it all open again in a few days. So no
great feat, but really a disappointing kind of
thing, but also showed the number of problems that
we faced with that terrain for those people. Thank
you very much.